All content that is audio-only like a podcast, or video-only like a silent movie, must have a text description or an audio description.

* Video-only content that communicates information (like a silent movie) has a text transcript or a audio description that describes the video.

### Common mistakes

* Audio-only content that communicates information does not have a text transcript;
* Video-only content that communicates information does not have a text transcript or an audio description;
* The text transcript for audio-only content does not include all spoken dialogue and sound effects;
* The text transcript for video-only content does not include descriptions of all important visual information;
* The text transcript for audio-only or video-only content is not clearly labelled as such.
* The audio description for video-only content does not include descriptions of all important visual information;













# Text or audio description (videos and presentations)

> For videos and presentations, provide an equivalent text description, or an audio description of what happens on screen.

## What?

Video content like instructional videos must have audio description, unless it already has a text alternative.

### Requirements

*   Video content is audio described, or has a text alternative that describes the visual content of the video.

### Official guidelines

* [1.2.3 Audio description or media alternative (A) in the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines](https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/media-equiv-audio-desc.html)

## Why?

This ensures that information communicated visually in the video is available to people who cannot see it.

## How?

### Common mistakes

* The video does not have audio description or a text alternative;
* The audio description does not describe important information communicated visually in the video;
* The text alternative does not describe important information communicated visually in the video;
* The audio description is not synchronised to complement the audio content of the video.

### Supporting docs and references

* [What is audio description?](https://www.nomensa.com/blog/2010/what-is-audio-description)

## Further information

### Sources

* [GOV.UK Government Digital Service (GDS)](https://alphagov.github.io/wcag-primer/#wcag-2-1-getting-started "The GOV.UK GDS")
