This document is in beta. Help us by [reporting issues via Github](https://github.com/theappbusiness/accessibility-guidelines) or [email](mailto:jeanfrancois@theappbusiness.com)

[Back to the overview page](./../index.html)

# Order of elements in code

On this page:
* [Summary](#summary)
* [Requirements](#requirements)
* [Guidance for Design](#guidance-for-design)
* [Guidance for iOS](#guidance-for-ios)
* [Guidance for Android](#guidance-for-android)
* [Guidance for Flutter](#guidance-for-flutter)
* [Guidance for Web](#guidance-for-web)
* [More info](#more-info)

---

## Summary

**Make sure that elements appear in a logical reading order in code, so that they are presented in a meaningful order to screen reader users.**

Content on the page needs to be announced by screen readers following a logical reading order.

---

## Requirements

#### Requirements for both native and web

* When users navigate the page using a keyboard's 'tab' key, or cursor arrows (when a screen reader is on), elements receive the [keyboard focus](./definitions.md#keyboard-focus) and [screen reader cursor]() following a predictable, natural reading order.
  * A natural reading order is from left to right and top to bottom in most cases in Western countries.
  * The easiest way to avoid focus order issues is to make sure that elements are displayed on screen in the same order as they appear in the Document Object Model (Web) / View Hierarchy (iOS and Android).

#### Requirements for both native and web

* Tabular data is presented using proper HTML markup (`<table>`, `<tr>`, `<th>`, and `<td>` elements)

### Why?

#### The order in which elements appear in code matters

* Screen readers go through elements on a page/screen in the order in which they appear in the Document Object Model (Web) / View Hierarchy (iOS and Android), which is a tree-like structure that contains all the elements on the page.

* The order in which elements appear in that Document Object Model / View Hierarchy might be different from the order in which they're laid out visually on screen.
    * This can happen for example if certain CSS techniques are used to change the relative positioning of elements on the page.

* The order in which elements appear in that Document Object Model / View Hierarchy matters to user experience.
    * When people use a screen reader, the keyboard or a Switch control, they interact with elements on the page in the order in which they appear in that Document Object Model / View Hierarchy.

* So make sure that elements appear in the Document Object Model / View Hierarchy in a reading order that's natural and makes sense.

### Official wording in the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines

> [**1.3.2 Meaningful Sequence:**](https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/content-structure-separation-sequence.html) When the sequence in which content is presented affects its meaning, a [correct reading sequence](https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/content-structure-separation-sequence.html#correct-reading-sequencedef) can be [programmatically determined](https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/content-structure-separation-sequence.html#programmaticallydetermineddef). (Level A)

See the [W3C's detailed explanation of this guideline](https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/content-structure-separation-sequence.html) with techniques and examples.

---

## Guidance for Design

* When you provide different designs for different screen sizes (e.g. desktop and mobile, or for different break points), make sure that elements appear in the same order across on the different designs.
  * If you can't do that, call it out to developers as they're likely to need to create different structures for the different designs.

### Common mistakes

* The order of interactive elements is not consistent across designs for different screen sizes.
  * For example, imagine that you've designed a modal dialog with two buttons: 'Cancel' and 'OK':
    * On the design for large screens, the 'Cancel' button is positioned to the left of the 'OK' button. ('Cancel' comes before 'OK' in the reading order).
    * But on the design for small screens, the 'Cancel' button is positioned to the bottom of the 'OK' button. ('Cancel' now comes after 'OK' in the reading order).

### More guidance for design

* [Annotating designs for accessibility](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1n0DkLoFydmbNxLisivqHh8xoo467HgBJ/view?usp=sharing) by Henny Swan at TPG

---

## Guidance for iOS

### Setting a custom order for child elements:

```swift
containerView.isAccessibilityElement = false
containerView.accessibilityElements = [firstLabel, secondLabel, button]
```

### How to test whether elements appear in a logical reading order in the View Hierarchy

* You can use the Visual Debugger in Xcode to see all elements within a View / View Controller, and check that they are listed in a reading order that makes sense.

### More guidance for iOS

* [UIAccessibilityContainer developer reference on apple.com](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/uikit/accessibility/uiaccessibilitycontainer "developer.apple.com reference")

---

## Guidance for Android

* By default all focussable views will be read from the screen reader from the top down. But there is a way to set a custom order for child elements.  
* It is essentially providing next focussed target for keyboard input. (The container doesn't need any special flags for it to work).
* When using this technique, make sure that elements appear in a the same natural reading, visually and in code. The best way to do that is often to keep the default order in which views are read might.

```xml
<RelativeLayout ...>
    <Button
        android:id="@+id/button1"
        android:nextFocusForward="@+id/editText1"
        ... />
    <Button
        android:id="@+id/button2"
        android:nextFocusForward="@+id/button1"
        ... />
    <EditText
        android:id="@id/editText1"
        android:nextFocusForward="@+id/button2"
        ...  />
    ...
</RelativeLayout>
```

Alternative from API 22 is to specify the traversal order `android:accessibilityTraversalAfter="@id"`.  
This is the recommended way but there is the API 22 restriction.
```xml
<RelativeLayout ...>
    <Button
        android:id="@+id/button1"
        android:accessibilityTraversalAfter="@+id/editText1"
        ... />
    <Button
        android:id="@+id/button2"
        android:accessibilityTraversalAfter="@+id/button1"
        ... />
    <EditText
        android:id="@id/editText1"
        android:accessibilityTraversalAfter="@+id/button2"
        ...  />
    ...
</RelativeLayout>
```

#### More guidance for Android

* [Support keyboard navigation developer reference on developer.android.com](https://developer.android.com/training/keyboard-input/navigation)

---

## Guidance for Flutter

Flutter deals with assistive technologies like screen readers using the `Semantics()` widget. For a quick introduction of the `Semantics()` widget you can read this [article](https://www.didierboelens.com/2018/07/semantics/).
##

* By default all focusable widgets will be read out in the order that they are drawn on the screen from top down. 

There are ways of affecting the order for custom navigation of elements with a screen reader. By passing a `SemanticSortKey` to the `sortKey` property of `Semantics()` the element with the lower key value will be read first.

```dart 
Column(
    children: <Widget>[
        Semantics(
            sortKey: OrdinalSortKey(1), // will be read/focused second by the screen reader
            child: SecondWidget()
        ),    
        Semantics(
            sortKey: OrdinalSortKey(0), // will be read/focused first by the screen reader
            child: FirstWidget()
        ),
    ]
),
```

---

## Guidance for Web

* Screen reader software renders content in the order in which it appears in the Document Object Model (DOM). Place content in the DOM in a correct reading order either through source code or inserting nodes via JavaScript.

### Do not use positive values with `tabindex`

* Do not use positive values with `tabindex`.

#### Example

```html
<h1 tabindex="-1">I'm the heading for a modal dialog</h1>
...
<div tab-index="0" class="fake_button" aria-role="button">Button Label</div>
```

#### Failure example

```html
<div tab-index="3" class="fake_button" aria-role="button">Button Label</div>
```

### Be careful when using CSS Float, Flexbox, Grid and `position`

* With CSS Flexbox, don't use the `order` property or `flex-direction: reverse;`;
* With CSS Grid, be careful with manual placement of items on the grid;
* When using `position` `absolute`, `fixed` or `sticky`, be careful to not detach the visual order of elements from the order in which they appear in the DOM;

#### Example

```html
<main>
 <div style="float:left;">
  <h1>Article header</h1>
  <div>Article content</div>
 </div>

 <aside style="float:right;">Supplementary info</aside>
</main>   
```

#### Failure example

```html
<main>
  <h1>Article header</h1>
  <aside style="position:relative; left:50%;top:-50%;">Supplementary info</aside>
  <div>Article content</div>
</main>
```

### Make new content appear in the DOM right after the element that triggers it

* If a button triggers extra content to appear (like a menu), make sure that that extra content appears next to the button in both the DOM order and visual order.

### How to test whether elements appear in a logical reading order in the DOM

* Turn off CSS on the page to see elements laid out on screen in the order in which they appear in the Document Object Model.

### Common mistakes

* The DOM order does not match the visual order because CSS properties like flexbox and grid-layout have been used to alter the visual presentation;
* The DOM order does not match the visual order because `tabindex` has been used with a value other than `-1` or `0`.
* A 'Agree to cookies' dialog that's positioned last in the DOM but appears at the top of the screen, without being implemented as modal (with the `inert` attribute)
* When CSS styles are disabled, the focus order is meaningless;
* Using dialogs or menus that are not adjacent to their trigger control in the sequential navigation order.
* Tabular data is displayed using CSS to present the appearance of a table, but the proper HTML markup has not been used;

### More guidance for Web

* [FlexBox and the keyboard navigation disconnect](http://tink.uk/flexbox-the-keyboard-navigation-disconnect/)
* [Writing CSS with Accessibility in Mind: Taking care of order](https://medium.com/@matuzo/writing-css-with-accessibility-in-mind-8514a0007939#bf38) by Manuel Matuzovic
* [The Dark Side of the Grid: Changing visual order](https://www.matuzo.at/blog/the-dark-side-of-the-grid-part-2/#visual-order) by Manuel Matuzovic
* [Using the tabindex attribute](https://www.paciellogroup.com/blog/2014/08/using-the-tabindex-attribute/)

---

## More info

### Sources

* [W3C Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/)
* [Government Digital Service WCAG 2.1 Primer](https://alphagov.github.io/wcag-primer/)
* [Barclays' Accessibility Design Standards](https://home.barclays/who-we-are/our-suppliers/our-requirements-of-external-suppliers/)
* [The BBC's Mobile Accessibility Guidelines](https://www.bbc.co.uk/guidelines/futuremedia/accessibility/mobile/summary)

### Contribute

This document is in beta. Help us by [reporting issues via Github](https://github.com/theappbusiness/accessibility-guidelines) or [email](mailto:jeanfrancois@theappbusiness.com)
