# Purpose of text fields

> If a text input field collects information about the user, identify its specific purpose in code (e.g. email, password, street address).

## What?

When an input field collects information **about to the user** (for example, if the input field is collecting the user's name, as opposed to the name of one of their friends), then its purpose needs to be identified in code in ways that can be understood by Assistive Technologies and browsers.

For example, if an HTML input field collects the user's first name, then adding the `autocomplete="given-name"` attribute lets the browser and screen readers know what the purpose of the input field is.

Note that if the input field was not collecting information about the user themselves (but about one of their friends, for example), then it should not have this attribute.

### Requirements

* A form may be written in a way where its purpose or the purpose of some of the components is not clear. This can be passed by using the
[HTML 5.2 autocomplete attributes](https://www.w3.org/TR/html52/sec-forms.html#sec-autofill), on fields that collect information about the user.  

> **NOTE:** Remember that you only need to add Autocomplete attributes to inputs that collect **information about the user**.

### Official guidelines

* [1.3.5 Identify Input Purpose (AA) in the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/identify-input-purpose.html)

## Why?

* People with language and memory problems or disabilities benefit from the system auto-filling their information.
* People with motor impairments also benefit from not having to fill in forms with the same information when the system can do it for them.

## How?

### iOS

Setting specific content types on labels, which will automatically present options that iOS knows about to the user:

```swift
prefixLabel.textContentType = .namePrefix
firstNameLabel.textContentType = .givenName
surnameLabel.textContentType = .familyName
suffixLabel.textContentType = .nameSuffix
phoneNumberLabel.textContentType = .telephoneNumber
creditCardNumber.textContentType = .creditCardNumber
```

#### Supporting docs and references

* [UITextInputTraits.textContentType developer reference](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/uikit/uitextinputtraits/1649656-textcontenttype "developer.apple.com reference")

---

### Android

For `ImageView`, `ImageButton`, `Check Box` or other Views use :

```xml
android:contentDescription="label"
```

For `EditTexts` and `TextViews` use :

```xml
android:hint="label"
```

If a View needs to be a label for another View use :

```xml
android:labelFor="@id/edit_text"
```

#### Supporting docs and references

* [EditText.labelFor() developer reference](https://support.google.com/accessibility/android/answer/7158690?hl=en-GB "developer.android.com reference")

---


### Web

#### Common mistakes

* Building a form that collects information about the user without the autocomplete (or other semantic that identifies the purpose of the input).
* Putting the `autocomplete` attribute on input fields that collect information that is not about the user themselves (for example, if the input field is for collecting information about a friend of the user)

#### Collecting data on a user with autofill:

```html
<h2>Personal Information</h2>
<label for="1">Name</label>
<input type="text" name="1" id="1" autocomplete="name">
<label for="2">Honorific / Prefix</label>
<input type="text" name="2" id="2" autocomplete="honorific-prefix">
<label for="3">Given Name</label>
<input type="text" name="3" id="3" autocomplete="given-name">
<label for="4">Additional Name</label>
<input type="text" name="4" id="4" autocomplete="additional-name">
<label for="5">Family name</label>
<input type="text" name="5" id="5" autocomplete="family-name">
<label for="6">Honorific Suffix</label>
<input type="text" name="6" id="6" autocomplete="honorific-suffix">
```
Example of a form collecting data on a user with autocomplete attributes.

#### Supporting docs and references

* Find out [how to use the HTML 5.2 autocomplete](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/html/H98) attributes.
* An [example of a form using autocomplete](http://john.foliot.ca/demos/autofill.php) - (Thanks to John Foliot)

## Further information

### Sources

* [GOV.UK Government Digital Service (GDS)](https://alphagov.github.io/wcag-primer/#wcag-2-1-getting-started "The GOV.UK GDS")
